OSSM-11012 [DOCS] Review and update Ingress docs for ambient mode (#101087)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ossm-exposing-a-service-by-using-the-kubernetes-gateway-api-in-ambient-mode.adoc

metadata:
  name: httpbin-gateway
  namespace: httpbin
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio
  listeners:
  - name: default
    hostname: "httpbin.example.com"
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: All
----
`"httpbin.example.com"`:: Specifies the virtual hostname that clients use when attempting to access a mesh service on the associated port.

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f httpbin-gw.yaml
----

. Create a YAML file named `httpbin-waypoint-hr.yaml` that defines an `HTTPRoute` resource for the waypoint proxy.
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: httpbin-waypoint-route
  namespace: httpbin
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: httpbin-waypoint
    namespace: httpbin
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /status
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /headers
    backendRefs:
    - name: httpbin
      port: 8000

----
* `spec.parentRefs` binds the `HTTPROUTE` resource to the waypoint Gateway resource. It configures Layer 7 (L7) routing rules that the waypoint will enforce.

> * `spec.backendRefs` routes the matching traffic to the `httpbin` service by defining a `backendRefs` that includes the name and port of the `httpbin` service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `spec.rules.backendRefs` routes the matching traffic to the `httpbin` service by defining a `backendRefs` that includes the name and port of the `httpbin` service.
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -n httpbin -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openshift-service-mesh/istio/refs/heads/master/samples/httpbin/httpbin.yaml
----

. Deploy a waypoint proxy by creating a YAML file named `httpbin-waypoint.yaml` that defines a {k8s}Gateway resource, similar to the following example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: httpbin-waypoint
  namespace: httpbin
  labels:
    istio.io/waypoint-for: service
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE

----

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f httpbin-waypoint.yaml
----

. Enable ingress waypoint routing on the `httpbin` service by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label service httpbin -n httpbin istio.io/ingress-use-waypoint=true
----
+
The label ensures that traffic from the ingress gateway routes through the waypoint proxy and the L7 policies configured on the waypoint proxy are applied to the ingress traffic, before reaching the `httpbin` service.

> 

Reviewer: The following step is missing, please add this.

Label the namespace so that all the services inside the namespace will be routed through the waypoint.

```
oc label ns httpbin istio.io/use-waypoint=httpbin-waypoint
```

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f httpbin-ingress-hr.yaml
----

. Create a YAML file named `httpbin-waypoint-hr.yaml` that defines an `HTTPRoute` resource for the waypoint proxy.
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: httpbin-waypoint-route
  namespace: httpbin
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: httpbin-waypoint
    namespace: httpbin
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /status
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /headers
    backendRefs:
    - name: httpbin
      port: 8000

----
* `spec.parentRefs` binds the `HTTPROUTE` resource to the waypoint Gateway resource. It configures L7 routing rules that the waypoint will enforce.

* `spec.rules.backendRefs` routes the matching traffic to the `httpbin` service by defining a `backendRefs` that includes the name and port of the `httpbin` service.

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f httpbin-waypoint-hr.yaml
----

[NOTE]
====

> In ambient mode, the traffic from the ingress gateway flows through the waypoint proxy labeled `istio.io/ingress-use-waypoint=true`. The `HTTPRoute` resource applies path-based routing policies before the traffic reaches the `httpbin` service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example use-case, traffic from the ingress gateway flows through the waypoint proxy, thanks to the `istio.io/ingress-use-waypoint=true` label. The `HTTPRoute` resource then applies path-based routing policies before the traffic reaches the httpbin service.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// * service-mesh-docs-main/gateways/ossm-getting-traffic-into-a-mesh.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-exposing-a-service-by-using-the-kubernetes-gateway-api-in-ambient-mode_{context}"]
= Exposing a service by using the {k8s} Gateway API in ambient mode

[role="_abstract"]
You can use the {k8s} Gateway API to create `Gateway` and `HTTPRoute` resources and deploy a gateway in ambient mode. The resources configure the gateway to expose a service in the mesh to traffic outside the mesh.

.Prerequisites

* You are logged in to the {ocp-product-title} web console as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

> * You installed the {SMProductName} Operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* You have installed the {SMProductName} Operator.
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create namespace httpbin 
----

. Apply the label for ambient mode by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label namespace httpbin istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient
----

. Deploy a sample service named `httpbin` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -n httpbin -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openshift-service-mesh/istio/refs/heads/master/samples/httpbin/httpbin.yaml
----

. Deploy a waypoint proxy by creating a YAML file named `httpbin-waypoint.yaml`, similar to the following example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: httpbin-waypoint
  namespace: httpbin
  labels:
    istio.io/waypoint-for: service
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE

----

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f httpbin-waypoint.yaml
----

. Enable ingress waypoint routing on the `httpbin` service by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label service httpbin -n httpbin istio.io/ingress-use-waypoint=true
----
+

> The label ensures that traffic from the ingress gateway routes through the waypoint proxy and the L7 policies configured on the waypoint proxy are applied to the ingress traffic, before reaching the `httpbin` service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The label ensures that traffic from the ingress gateway routes through the waypoint proxy, and the L7 policies configured on the waypoint proxy are applied to the ingress traffic before it reaches the `httpbin` service.
```
